So as I mentioned,
we have this React Context Concept,
which allows us to manage State
kind of behind the scenes in React,
such that we actually are able to directly change it
from any component in our App
and directly pass it to any component in our App
without building such a prop chain.
For that here in my source folder,
next to my components folder,
I will add a new folder, Context
and you don't have to name it Context.
You could also name it State or store
often such App by it's State is also named store.
So maybe let's go with that.
And in there, I'll add a new file
and since we're going to manage some authentication State
I will add Auth-Context in there.
So hence I will name the file Auth-Context.js,
the exact naming is up to you though.
You could also name it AuthContext like this,
So in this Pascal case notation
but this would imply that
we're going to store a component in there
and that's not directly what we were doing.
Hence, I'll go for this naming using Kebab case.
So Auth-Context.js and I can say right away,
you can have multiple Contexts
for multiple global States in your app
and of course, you can also use just one Context
for a bigger State, that's all up to you
but let's maybe just learn how Context works.
So we've get to Auth-Context.js file
and in there we import React from React
as if we would build a component
but we're not going to do that.
Instead on React, I'm going to call, create Context
and does does what the name implies.
It creates such a Context object in the end.
Now create Context takes a default Context
and Context here really is just your app
or component white State.
So it's up to you what that State should be.
It could be something simple like just a string, my State.
if your app white or a component white State
is just some texts.
You could have some well, text as your default State.
Often though it will be an object,
it will be an object where you, for example, in our case,
managed IsLoggedIn State
and set this to false initially, let's say.
Now what we get back from create Context
is something interesting though.
It will be a component or it will be an object
that also contains components, let's put it like this.
So we get back AuthContext
and I'll name it like this because
whilst Auth-Context itself is not a component,
it is an object that will contain a component.
Now we don't need this object here though,
instead we'll need it in the other components.
So I'll export it as a default
to make it available in our files.
So now we can import this specific Context object
and to then use Context in your app
you need to do two things.
You need to provide it, which basically tells React,
"Hey, here's my Context."
All components that are wrapped by it
should have access to it
and I'll come back to that wrapping part in a second.
And besides providing, you then need to consume it.
You need to hook into it, you need to listen to it,
if you wanna call it like this.
Now, providing is always the first step.
Providing means that you wrap in JSX code
all the components that should be able to tap
into that Context.
So that should be able to listen to that Context.
Any component that's not wrapped will not be able to listen.
So here, if we know that we need this Context
everywhere in the entire application.
So in all components possibly,
we wanna wrap everything in app component with it.
If we knew that we only needed,
let's say, in the log in component and its child components,
we could only wrap to login component.
But here we'll need it in the main header,
we'll need a down there, we'll need it everywhere.
So therefore,
we can wrap
our main header
and this main section with Auth-Context
and for that we will need to import it.
So make sure you add this import from store Auth-Context
to import this Auth-Context object.
And I said that this itself wouldn't be a component
in JSX we need a component though,
but with a dot we can access a property
on this Auth-Context object that contains a component
and that's the provider.
Auth-Context provider is a component
we can use in our JSX code,
and we can wrap it around other components
and those other components
and all their descendant components.
So all their children
and their children's children and so on,
all those components will now have access to that Context.
Now, since we use Auth-Context as a wrapper here,
we can now technically also use React Fragment
because we got this wrapping component
as a root level component I returned here
and with that, the main header,
but also to log in and the home component
and all their children will have access to Auth-Context.
So now we provide this.
Now, we have the second part
and that is the listening part
to get access to our value,
which at the moment is always just this default value,
which never changes.
We're going to work on that too, of course,
but to have access to that value, we need to listen
and we can listen in two ways.
We can listen by using Auth-Context consumer
or by using a React Hook.
Now we'll typically use the React Hook,
but let me show you the other alternative
to consumer as well.
Let's say here in navigation, we're interested in knowing
whether the user isAuthenticated or not.
For that we can also use Auth-Context steer
and wrap everything where we need data from it
with that consumer.
So here, for example, we could wrap the entire component
with Auth-Context.
Again, make sure to import it, of course
dot consumer now.
Previously we had the provider, now we have the consumer.
The consumer works a bit differently though.
The consumer takes a child
which actually should be a function
between curly braces like this
and as argument, you'll get your Context data.
So in our case, you'll get this object here.
And then,
in this function you should return your JSX code,
which should have access to that data.
So here I'm grabbing all that NAV code, I'm returning that
and in there, I now for example,
have access to ctx.isLockedIn
because my Context object is this object here
and there I have it IsLockedIn prop.
Now, if you save that, you will however see
if you reload that this crashes.
And the reason for that,
is that we do have a default value here,
but this default value will actually only be used
if we would consume here without having a provider.
So technically the provider is not even needed,
however, you should memorize this pattern
I explained earlier, where you need the provider.
Technically, you don't need it if you have a default value,
but in reality, you will use Context
to have a value which can change
and that will only be possible with a provider.
So therefore, to make sure that this does not crash,
let's go back to the provider
and they're on the provider component
you can add a value prop,
and this has to be named value
because this is not a component by you
and to do that you can also pass your object.
So in this case, I will just repeat my default object here,
but now you would be able to change that object,
for example, through State and the app component.
And whenever it changes, the new value will be passed down
to all consuming components,
but that is something I will also come back to in a second.
So here, let me save this
and now it reloads without problems.
Now of course, if I now log in,
you will see that we only have one link here
so that first link, the user's link is missing
because there I'm pulling data from my Context
and that at the moment is never changing.
So let's make sure we can change it
before I then show you the alternative consumer.
Here changing it is easy,
we have set up the here in the app component
and there we manage to IsLockedIn State anyways.
So instead of hard coding our IsLockedIn value,
in the value we pass to the provider,
we can set it to IsLockedIn, of course.
And if we do that, this value object
will be updated by React whenever IsLoggedIn changed.
And that new object, that new Context object
will be passed down to all listening components.
So to all components where we consume this Context.
The difference to before is
that we don't need to use a prop to forward that therefore.
Instead we just set it on the provider
and then everywhere in all child components,
we can listen to that.
So here we could remove the isAuthenticated prop
on the main header
and in the main header therefore, stop forwarding it
to the navigation.
and in navigation, we could now use Context.IsLoggedIn
everywhere where we need the IsLockedIn information.
And that's now where we break up that props chain,
where we stop forwarding that data,
which we don't need in the main header
and where we instead leverage Context.
So now if I reload you see that still works
and now the link is back,
but now we're using Context here.
Now I did mention, however that
the consumer is just one way of consuming our Context.
It's an okay-ish way, but I don't like that syntax too much
having that function that then returns our code.
You can do that, but there actually is a more elegant way
and more elegant solution using the use Context Hook.